## The Austrian Cultural Forum London
<br />
<br />
<br />
The Austrian Cultural Forum London is both a venue and a meeting place for artists of all kinds. We promote cultural contacts between the UK and Austria by organising, initiating, facilitating and supporting artists and projects in the fields of music, performing arts, visual arts, literature, film and science. 

While not brushing aside tradition, the focus of our programme is on contemporary work by younger creative minds from Austria and the UK. This is why we are proud to present some of Ars Electronica’s young artists at the Digital Design Weekend at the V&A and at the Austrian Cultural Forum London. 

The Austrian Cultural Forum London (ACF) is turning 60 this year and we are taking this opportunity to celebrate all the artists, poets, musicians, authors and academics who have come through the doors of 28 Rutland Gate over these six decades. 

Austrians feel passionately about their identity as a Kulturnation (cultural nation). At a time when issues of national identity are hotly debated, we can contribute to this discussion with a contemporary programme that goes beyond stereotypes. Austrian identity at the beginning of the 21st century is also one of strong pluralism in a shared European identity that has always been shaped by strong cooperation and exchange throughout the continent. In this spirit, we embark on this current Anniversary adventure, saying a big “Thank You!” to our partners and audiences past and present. 

www.acflondon.org
